# Assignment2
#The RScript file contains code to import, edit, and analyze countdata from a study seeking to understand how the impacts of heat on coral differs based on variation in microenvironments

#The data imported here is specifically from the ex situ experiment of high vs. low flow microenvironments. 

#Introduction: 
#Coral bleaching as a result of increasing water temperatures is a phenomemon of increasing concern for scientists, and understanding what factors impact the frequency of bleaching and recovery is of importance for addressing this. It has been noted in previous literature that variations in the microenvironments of coral, such as water flow, impacts bleaching. Coral in high water flow environments have been found to be less susceptible to heat stress, and have been observed to recover quicker from bleaching. High water flow causes thinning of the diffusive boundary layer (DBL), which in turn increases nutrient uptake, increased gas exchange rates, and increased flow of dissolved inorganic carbon. The molecular mechanisms for how coral in high flow sites have decreased stress response to changes in temperature is not yet understood. This experiment sought to understand these molecular pathways by comparing transcriptomes between high and low flow sites. In analyzing transcriptomic profiles and differentially expressed genes via DESeq and GO analysis can point to pathways upregulated in Acropora staghorns in high flow versus low flow sites. This can ultimately expand our understanding of how bleaching occurs and how bleaching events can be controlled or reversed. In particular, this analysis focuses on data derived from ex situ experiments outlined in "Going with the flow: How corals in high-flow environments can beat the heat", published in 2021 in Molecular Ecology. 


#Conclusion: 
#In conclusion, the output data files show that there is indeed a distinct transcriptomic profile for Acropora staghorn that occupy high flow microenvironments as compared to the same species in low flow microenvironments. In the ex-situ experiment, which was the source of this data, the tanks were normalized and the coral were allowed an adaptation period of the same length to ensure that the only significant variable was the flow rate. This flow rate was modelled on the observed flow rates in the collection sites that the in-situ experiments occured in. First, an outlier function was performed to remove outliers and save a summary of the removed data points in a new folder. There were 7 outliers removed, as indicated by variable g. The analysis functions following, with the filtered remaining data points. The dispersion plot of the DESeq analysis results from the counts from the samples in high vs. low flow microenvironments showed that count reads were dispersed nicely along the mean as expected with some variation. As the scatter plot of the log fold change between the treatment types furhter inticated, there were several clearly upregulated genes in the high flow that had a strong log fold change. There were fewer genes that were downregulated in the high flow samples compared to the low flow samples (centered around zero log fold change in grey), but that was expected as we expected more molecular pathways to be upregulated to support response to the heat stress. The heat map matrix also showed stronger correlation between profiles of high flow versus low flow samples. High flow sample profiles almost did not match low flow profiles at all, as indicated by the shading. Whereas, there was a stronger match between different high flow samples, furhter exhibiting that the transcriptome profile is linked to flow rates and is characteristic. In conclusion, this comparative analysis of the transcriptome data shows that flow rates do cause molecular changes in the Acropora staghorn species, resulting in pathways that allow the high-flow-occupying coral to better respond to heat stress and recover from bleaching events. Further analysis into the GO enrichment data will provide more insight as to exactly which genes are being upregulated, and exactly which molecular pathways assist in this response.